.. module:: dft.stm

**XXX This page needs more work!**

STMTool
-------

The ``STMTool`` class generates Tersoff-Hamann STM topographs.

Here is how you could make a STM picture from the
`GPAW`_ code, assuming you have allready generated
the the Al100.gpw GPAW restart file,
(see the :ref:`STM tutorial<stm-tutorial>` for a full description):


>>> from ASE.Utilities.ElectronicStates import ElectronicStates
>>> from ASE.Utilities.STMTool import STMTool
>>> from ASE.Visualization.VTK import VTKPlotSTM

>>> loe = ElectronicStates(filename = 'Al100.gpw')

>>> stm = STMTool(loe,contourvalue=1.0e-4, channel="s",
...               normalaxis=2, smoothfactor=0.1)    # available channels: s,px,py,pz

>>> stmplot = VTKPlotSTM(stm)
>>> stmplot.set_color_range((3.325,3.55))      # from surface span color range
>>> stmplot.render()                         # updates picture



From the planewave code `dacapo`_, the dacapo codes own
version of the ElectronicStates class must be used:

>>> from Dacapo.ElectronicStates import ElectronicStates
>>> from ASE.Utilities.STMTool import STMTool
>>> from ASE.Visualization.VTK import VTKPlotSTM

>>> loe = ElectronicStates(filename='Al100.nc')

From this point the code is identical to the example above.


The list of keywords for the STMTool object is:

``listofeigenstates``
  The ``ElectronicStates`` object holding information about each eigenstate of the slab.

``contourvalue``
  The density of states at the Fermi level for which the topograph is generated.
  This argument is mandatory, as no universal (simple) default is natural. Often
  used values are [1.0e-6 - 1.0e-3], but is very system dependent.

``channel``
  Selects whether the topograph is generated by the value or gradient isosurface
  of the Fermi level DOS. This adjusts  for the orbital character of the DOS of
  the actual STM tip in the probing energy window, i.e. the STM tip states that
  couples to the substrate. Available options are "s", "px", "py" and "pz".
  Default is "s".

``normalaxis``
  The surface normal direction, (0,1,2) for (x,y,z) respectively.
  normalaxis = 2 is default.

``smoothfactor``
  The thermal convolution applied to the slab states. It is necessary to apply
  this due to finite k-point sampling.




STM linescans
-------------

The class `STMLineScan` can be used to simulate an STM linescan. It must be
initialized with an instance of the STMTool class.

Note that the linescans are limited to be along one of the axis of
the unit cell. The origin of the linescan can only assume discrete
values corresponding to the FFT grid.

The class is used like::

   linescan = STMLineScan(stm,fftnumber=12,axis=1)

See more details in the `linescan section` of the `STM tutorial`.


.. _dacapo: http://www.fysik.dtu.dk/campos/Dacapo/
.. _GPAW: http://wiki.fysik.dtu.dk/gpaw
